# The Transition to Open Access: to What Extent Can Research Funders Influence the Market for APCs?

My Masters disseration carried out at City University London (January 2016). 

## Abstract 

This dissertation assesses the extent to which research funders can influence the market for APCs. This question is tackled through the use of case studies, particularly the Wellcome Trust and the Austrian Science Fund (FWF). The dissertation assesses the secondary literature, policy documents and APC data. This is supported through interviews with the Wellcome Trust and FWF. In addressing the extent to which research funders influence the market for APCs a number of issues are explored. The role of policy in shaping open access is analysed. Chapter two outlines the motivations government and research funders have in supporting open access. In particular, this chapter assesses the recommendations of the Finch Report (2012) and the requirements for the next Research Excellence Framework (REF 2020) exercise. Following this, the market for Article Processing Charges (APCs) is explored in chapter three. This focuses on assessing the current size of the market and the average price of APCs. It also seeks to understand the extent to which the market for APCs fits the definition of a monopolistic market. Chapter four compares the current policies of the Wellcome Trust and FWF, outlining the extent to which their policies aim to influ- ence the market and the mechanisms used. Price caps are identified as a major difference in policy and subsequently discussed in detail. The dissertation concluded that, although research fun- ders influence the market for APCs, this influence is constrained by a number of factors: research funders may primarily intend their open access policies to ensure the research they fund is available open access while external factors limit the extent to which research funders can, independently, influence the market for APCs.
